The law has often been unfair to people of color.

For example
1. The police are more likely to stop and search blacks.
1. Blacks are more likely to serve longer prison sentences than whites for the same crime.
1. Most of the people who are on death row are black.

The ACLU has been fighting for civil rights for over 100 years. In a report they state that 
the entire criminal justice system is biased against people of color. We need to change this.
It can no longer be acceptable that people of color are treated differently than whites.
The administration of justice must be fair to all. 







Today's historic announcement by the director of public prosecutions confirms what Debbie Purdy has long argued – the general code followed by prosecutors is of little use in unusual, difficult and sensitive cases.

Prosecutors usually have a discretion to prosecute based on whether there is enough evidence in a case, and whether it is in the public interest to do so.

Throughout Purdy's case prosecutors had argued – ultimately unsuccessfully – that this general code was sufficient to achieve justice in cases such as Purdy's.

But perhaps more significantly – igniting an issue likely to gather further momentum – the Crown Prosecution Service argued it was unworkable to codify a tendency not to prosecute, when assisted suicide remains a serious criminal offence on the statute books.

Despite those reservations, the current director of public prosecutions, Keir Starmer, has moved quickly to do just that – publicly setting out the factors that militate against prosecution in cases where a person has taken the initiative in their own suicide and where any assistance is based on compassion.

Today's policy is not entirely without precedent. The CPS already publishes detailed guidance in respect of crimes such as rape and domestic violence, designed to assist prosecutors in the exercise of their discretion.

But never has the CPS set out so clearly factors leading away from prosecution in such a controversial area of criminal law. Debbie Purdy, whose tireless campaign for greater clarity is directly responsible for today's guidelines, said she was "relieved" to be able to make a more informed decision about whether her husband assists in her suicide.

By winning her legal battle, Purdy has essentially forced prosecutors into recognising defences to the law on assisted suicide, which Parliament has never chosen to enact. They are deeply uncomfortable with this position, and are likely to contribute to the pressure on MPs and peers to resolve the issue once and for all. But so far, the only consensus among parliamentarians is how little consensus there is.
It is clear that the government is determined to be as jubilant as possible about next month's 60th anniversary of legal aid. The goody bag I received at a party celebrating the history of state-funded access to justice included such coveted items as a pink and silver badge pin, and a balloon. The pink theme, a proud civil servant told me, symbolised the colour of the ribbons still used to tie up the "bundles" of papers barristers take to court.

But behind the glossy photo gallery of famous cases since the Legal Aid and Advice Act received royal assent on 30 July, 1949, things in the world of publicly funded law are far from rosy. The government has insisted repeatedly that there will be no increase on legal aid spending for the foreseeable future, and last week it announced plans for means-testing in some criminal trials in order to save £25m from the legal aid budget.

The public face of this message is the minister for legal aid, Lord [Willy] Bach, himself an ex-legal aid barrister who had more than 25 years' practice defending in criminal cases, and has enjoyed a swift ascent to ministerial office since leaving the bar in 1999 to take up a peerage and a series of government posts.

Bach is a small, lithe man, well liked by those who work with him. His easy manner betrays all the signs of a long career on his feet, charming juries and brokering door-of-court deals. "I've got a passion for legal aid," he says. "I think it's a wonderful service that we provide - not perfect, but a wonderful service so that people who otherwise wouldn't be able to afford it can go to law in the broadest sense."

This enthusiasm may have been met with more agreement when the British legal aid system was regarded by many as a model for other countries to aspire to. But the mood has soured lately as the money allocated to the service has been frozen, and it is now facing cuts - while demand continues to rise.

Bach has been fighting this battle on numerous fronts, one of which is an increasingly heated dispute with the legal profession over access to publicly paid work. Measures to require law firms to bid for legal aid contracts have been described by many as an attack on community-based legal services, and an erosion of the rights of people to have access to legal representation, because it will favour larger law firms. Barristers claim that new fixed fees for legal aid, to replace hourly rates, drain talent from the pool of those available to represent defendants, who are often vulnerable people.

"I don't blame them for it," Bach says in response to the reaction of the legal profession to proposed changes. "That's what anybody would do when it comes to earning their living. Of course they are going to defend what they've got. But sometimes it's easy to forget what the whole point of legal aid is, which is to protect vulnerable people. I do think that sometimes the debate about legal aid gets clouded over with just concerns about pay.

"We are at a time when there is no, and there is not going to be any, increase in the total legal aid fund, so we do have to take tough decisions between the various spends we can make."

Containing the cost of criminal cases - which has to be consistent with human rights protections that guarantee procedural safeguards and access to due process for those accused of crime - would allow increased spending on civil and social welfare law, Bach says. These areas of law, which include issues such as debt, housing and employment, may help people avoid later spiralling into contact with the criminal justice and family law system in the first place, he argues.

"Of the £2bn legal aid budget, too much is spent on crime, and much too little is spent on social welfare," he says. "If there's one thing I want to do in this job it is to promote social welfare law. It's about vulnerable people, and that's who legal aid is there to help."

Part of the answer to this, Bach says, is to introduce means testing in crown court cases - proposals which the government announced last week would go ahead from January, and which Bach says he is "looking forward to". The reforms come two years after a similar scheme was introduced in magistrates courts, and which - despite Bach's claims that it will lead to important savings from the criminal cases budget - has been met with outrage from the legal profession. It holds that there is a significant risk of miscarriages of justice for those facing charges as serious as murder and rape.

Family lawyers - who are locked in a seemingly intractable dispute with the government over fees - dispute strongly, however, whether publicly funded law can be divided up this way into areas that help vulnerable people and those that do not. The family bar say that reducing the fees for some areas of its work - which often deals with abusive domestic situations and involves children being taken into care - will leave inexperienced barristers ill-equipped to handle its complexity.

It is clear that Bach's years as a legal aid barrister have left him with limited sympathy for the legal profession over the dispute. Barristers' earnings have long been a contentious issue, with figures published recently showing a handful of criminal law QCs earning around £1m from legal aid in the year 2007-08. At a more junior level, where the majority of cases are handled, earnings are far lower, starting in some instances at £10,000 for the first year, while many entering the profession are estimated to owe up to £40,000 for the cost of training.

Nevertheless, Bach argues that the median earnings of family barristers - at around £66,000 - are roughly double the earnings of other publicly paid professionals such as teachers and social workers. "To become a teacher or a nurse, you have to do a terrific amount of work," Bach argues, dismissing arguments that GPs' earnings might be a more appropriate comparison.

The charge many have posed is that after 25 years as a criminal defence lawyer in which he doubtless earned far more than a social worker, Bach of all people should appreciate the degree of training and specialisation that is recognised in the earnings of self-employed barristers.

But Bach has moved on. Although he says he misses the "camaraderie" of the bar, he always hoped to end up in politics. He says: "Politics was always my first love. I think I learned quite a lot about how to do this job by my experience having to mug up cases at short notice, and the way in which barristers have to behave."

It's not an easy job. Bach, who acknowledges that his policies are deeply unpopular among many former colleagues, says: "Any legal aid minister, in their heart of hearts, would like to spend more. But this is taxpayers' money, and it's got to be spent properly and efficiently. Whichever government is in power, there has to be a cap on legal aid spend. I have to do what I can to ensure the legal aid is spent in the best possible way, and that's what I'm trying to do."

Career 2008-present: junior minister, Ministry of Justice; 2007-08: government whip; 2005-06: junior minister, Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs: 2001-05; junior minister, Ministry of Defence; 2000-01: junior minister, Lord Chancellor's Department; 1999-2000: government whip; 1972-99: barrister, Middle Temple.
The Crown Prosecution Service is failing the terminally ill by refusing to be clear about whether their relatives will face criminal charges for helping them to die, the high court heard yesterday.

Debbie Purdy, who was diagnosed in 1995 with primary progressive multiple sclerosis, says that when her condition becomes unbearable, she would like her husband, Omar Puente, to accompany her to Switzerland where she can die in comfort. Purdy hopes to use the facilities of Dignitas, the Swiss charity which assists the terminally ill to take their own life, by providing support, facilities and ultimately a fatal dose of barbiturates.

Speaking on the first day of the hearing, Purdy's barrister, David Pannick QC, said that although it was illegal to assist a suicide, cases where terminally ill patients were helped to die by loved ones were rarely prosecuted, making the law "confused and uncertain". The court heard that although many British people travel to Switzerland every year to die, none of their relatives has faced criminal charges on their return.

Purdy says the blind-eye approach of authorities is not good enough. "I just want clarity so I know whether or not my husband Omar will be prosecuted or questioned by the police if I decide to travel abroad to die and he accompanies me," she said. "I want to know what the law considers to be assisting suicide - is Omar open to prosecution if he helps me into a taxi to the airport, or books my flights?"

Purdy says her condition is such that by the time she is ready to die, she would depend on her husband's help to travel. "If the law is not clarified, I may be forced to travel alone before I am ready."

Although her husband, who sat beside her in court, has said he would go with her even if he risked jail, Purdy says she is not willing to take this risk.

Not all assisted suicide campaigners agree with Purdy's challenge. Nan Maitland, an 82-year old member of campaign group Friends at the End, watching the case in court yesterday, said: "People are worried that if this case is unsuccessful it will make it harder for their partners to assist them in ending their lives."

Purdy's legal team said that they were not seeking immunity from prosecution for her husband, but for more information about when prosecutions were likely. "It is impossible for someone in [Purdy's] position to get any useful guidance," Pannick said, adding that she was "entitled to a policy" to protect her right to a private and family life under article 8 of the European convention on human rights.

Purdy's solicitor, Saimo Chahal, questioned whether prosecutions were ever justified in cases of this nature. "Is it really in the public interest to prosecute people like Omar?"

The Crown Prosecution Service has said that it will not create a specific policy for assisted suicide but will consider each case individually in deciding whether to prosecute. The case continues.
Domestic violence will increase as the recession takes hold, the attorney general, Lady Scotland, predicts today.

"When families go through difficulties, if someone loses their job, or they have financial problems, it can escalate stress, and lead to alcohol or drug abuse, which are disinhibitors ... quite often violence can flow from that," she said in an interview with the Guardian.

Refuge, the charity supporting victims of violence, agreed: "Women may be more reluctant to leave because they worry about their financial situation. The effect of the economy on financial pressures that may make that worse." One woman is killed every two to three days on average in the UK, according to figures from the attorney general's office.

"As well as a human rights issue, which domestic violence clearly is, we have got to acknowledge [it] is a disabler of talent, disadvantaging a significant proportion of our population to achieve their potential," Scotland said. She also spoke of children: in more than half of known cases of domestic violence, children were directly abused, according to the NSPCC charity.

"In all areas of dysfunction there is an overrepresentation of children who have grown up in domestic violence situations," said Scotland.
A groundbreaking change in the law on assisted suicides could become inevitable tomorrow when the UK's highest court delivers its judgment in the case of Debbie Purdy, whose long legal fight has put her at the centre of the controversy.

Purdy, who has multiple sclerosis, claims that uncertainty as to whether her husband – the Cuban violinist Omar Puente – would face prosecution for assisting her suicide abroad breaches her human rights. She will learn tomorrow whether the law lords agree with her and demand a clarification of the law.

Experts said they think she has a strong chance of success, despite two previous court rulings that went against her, and said the case could become a turning point in the increasingly heated debate over assisted suicide, with profound implications for the prosecuting authorities, the police and parliament.

In some recent cases, the police have gathered evidence of potentially criminal assistance by relatives, but prosecutors have chosen not to pursue the cases.

"If Debbie Purdy wins, the law lords will be saying that you can't have a crime which is enforced only on the whim of the director of public prosecutions," said Lord Falconer, a former lord chancellor who supported an amendment to the law on assisted suicide. "And once he has set out clear principles that there would be no prosecutions for compassionate assistance, then the law has effectively been changed."

Other supporters of a change in the law on assisted suicide said that a victory for Purdy would lead to more far-reaching changes that could force parliament to introduce new legislation.

"If Purdy is successful I think parliament would have to act," said Sarah Wooton, chief executive of Dignity in Dying, which has supported her case. "The DPP would have to publish a prosecuting policy with criteria for and against prosecution."

"What this would really do is distinguish between compassionate assistance and malicious encouragement, rather than this blanket 'everything is illegal' approach. Surely parliament would need to react to that."

Opponents of a change in the law agreed that the decision, the last to be decided by the law lords before they become justices of the new supreme court in October, could have radical consequences.

"If the House of Lords were to hold in her favour, then it would dramatically change the basis on which the public prosecution service operates," said Lord Carlile, one of a majority of peers who recently opposed changes to the law on assisted suicide. He said tomorrow's decision could lead to an unworkable situation for prosecutors.

"If this is applicable to assisted dying, why is it not applicable to assisted fraud, self-defence, provocation and many other situations in which people might wish to contact the prosecutorial authorities and find out whether what they do is a crime or not? It would completely change the relationship between the prosecution service and the public and would actually make the service in my view very difficult to run."

The judgment comes after months of public debate about assisted suicide, with increasing numbers of British people travelling to Switzerland to use the facilities of the Swiss charity Dignitas.

On Tuesday it emerged that a GP who helped patients to end their lives at Dignitas was being questioned by the police. Dr Michael Irwin, from Surrey, said that he expected to be arrested and wanted to become a "martyr'' to highlight the plight of relatives facing jail for assisting the deaths of loved ones.

Earlier this month the double suicide of renowned British conductor Sir Edward Downes, 85, and his wife Joan, 74, also fuelled calls for parliament to change the law. The death of the couple, who were described as having deteriorating health when they ended their lives at Dignitas, is still the subject of a police investigation.

But despite investigating scores of cases where friends and relatives have travelled to Switzerland to assist suicides, there has not been a single prosecution for the offence – which carries a maximum sentence of 14 years' imprisonment.

"There are likely to be many similar cases in future, not least from among the 725 British members of the Swiss charity Dignitas," Lord Pannick QC, the barrister representing Purdy, told the law lords during the hearing last month.

"It is very unsatisfactory from the point of view of consistency and avoiding arbitrariness to have these decisions taken … without guidance in the form of a policy."

Last week the Royal College of Nursing, which previously opposed assisted dying, moved to a neutral position, prompting speculation that opinion in the medical profession is changing.

Although the British Medical Association continues to oppose a change in the law, a recent motion at its annual conference was defeated by only a narrow margin, with 44% of members supporting a change.

"There is strong support for a change in the law," Falconer said. "Most people would think compassionate assisters should not be prosecuted for taking their loved ones to Switzerland."

"I am hopeful about tomorrow," said Wooton. "The previous courts were personally sympathetic but rule-bound, but the law lords' approach seemed indicative of a different state of mind."
The court of protection is a little-known court that usually sits in private, with wide powers to rule on issues affecting adults who lack mental capacity to regulate their own affairs. However, after a test case brought by the media, the court – originally presided over by the "master in lunacy", but reformed in 2005 – is now subject to scrutiny when it rules on issues where there is a question of public interest.

The current case, brought by two public bodies to clarify whether a woman with a learning disability can be forcibly sterilised, is the latest in a series of controversial rulings about adults whose learning disabilities or mental health problems raise questions about their ability to provide consent.

Last month the court ruled on the case of "Alan", a 41-year-old man with a moderate learning disability whom a local authority wanted to restrain from having sex. Acknowledging that sex "involves very profound aspects of civil liberties and personal autonomy", judge Sir Nicholas Mostyn QC said that Alan did not have the capacity to consent because of his inability to understand the risks. The court ordered Alan to be given sex education before a final decision was made.

The wider law on sensitive questions of sex, contraception and medical treatment for people who lack capacity has also come under the spotlight, with judges describing it as "in a state of confusion".

In 2009, the House of Lords ruled that a mentally ill 28-year-old woman who had been given crack cocaine by a man and asked to perform sexual acts on him had not given consent, because she was unable to make a genuine choice.

"Choice is an exercise of free will, and [a] mental disorder may rob a person of free will in a number of different ways and in a number of different situations," said Lady Hale.

That case followed a number in which the courts had ruled that adults with learning disabilities or mental health problems lacked the capacity to marry, and that any marriage they entered into would be void in English law.

Similarly, the question of consent to medical treatment by adults who lack capacity has remained controversial.

In 1997 a pregnant woman known as MB, who was told she may need a caesarean delivery, refused an anaesthetic because of a phobia of needles. The court of appeal ruled that where panic or mental impairment eroded a person's capacity to give consent, doctors could provide the treatment if it were in the patient's best interests. So far, the court of protection has decided along similar lines, ruling last October that a 30-year-old woman, known as SB, could be given lifesaving medical treatment for a bone marrow condition, despite her fear of being touched.

The courts have been far more reluctant to authorise non-essential treatment.
The government is facing allegations of duplicity over changes to the equality bill after a leaked document showed conflicting statements about the position of churches and other religious organisations.

Churches say the government has assured them the equality bill will preserve their "special status", which allows them to turn down candidates for jobs as ministers or priests if they are actively homosexual, transsexual or, in the Catholic church, if they are women.

Statements in parliament have also presented the government's position as preserving the existing law for religious organisations. "[The equality bill] will not change the existing legal position regarding churches and employment," the leader of the House of Lords, Lady Royall, told peers recently.

But the Guardian has learned the government told the European commission it would toughen the law on religious organisations, making it harder for them to avoid equal treatment laws. A "reasoned opinion", kept secret by the government, threatened the UK with legal action unless the grounds on which religious groups could discriminate were narrowed.

The text of the document, which has not been made public until now, has led to criticisms that the government has told parliament and religious organisations that the law will remain the same, while assuring the EU the law would be strengthened. "This is a duplicitous betrayal of the rights of gay and lesbian church workers," said Evan Harris, the Liberal Democrat equality spokesman, who received a leaked copy of the legal document. "The government have been keeping secret this letter in order to hide from parliament … they appear to have told the EU that they will narrow the law in the equality bill in order to comply with the directive, while telling parliament and the public that there is no narrowing."

Last weekend a letter from three bishops argued that the "special status" given to religious organisations needed to be protected in the new bill. The bishops argue that they should be able to ensure that other staff, such as youth workers or teachers, have lifestyles compatible with church beliefs.

"Unless the present drafting of the bill is changed, churches and other faiths will find themselves more vulnerable to legal challenge than under the current law," the letter, from the bishops of Winchester, Exeter and Chester, said. "The government have said that they share our view ‑ that the current limited exemptions for organised religions are balanced and should not be further restricted. Yet they are proposing to modify them," the letter continues.

But the reasoned opinion sent by the European commission in November says that existing UK law is "too broad", and that a failure to change the provisions could lead to legal action. The document refers to a response from the government in which it agreed to address these concerns.

Demands that religious groups should comply with equality provisions have intensified as campaigners on both sides have sought the support of members of the House of Lords, which is due to debate the provisions tomorrow.

One former employee of a large evangelical organisation said that the law was already being abused to discriminate against too many employees.

"Many Christian charities have been requiring all staff have to comply with requirements on sex before marriage and adultery, as well as not engaging in homosexual relationships," said Sarah Hill, who worked for a large evangelical organisation for 20 years.

"It's one thing to apply that where there is a genuine occupational requirement, but why should your caretaker, accountant or post operator have to comply?""Regardless of what the government does and what they say, evangelical organisations will hold on to those conduct policies and believe they are correct," said Hill.

"There is real problem of religious organisations using the an unlawful loophole in the exemption for religious belief to sack or discriminate against gay and lesbian or divorced employees, and the government appears to be doing nothing to help," said Harris.
Britain's highest court issued a historic judgment today that could finally remove the fear of prosecution from people who travel abroad to support relatives seeking an assisted suicide.

In a unanimous ruling, the law lords ordered the director of public prosecutions to immediately draw up a policy that would spell out when prosecutions would and would not be pursued.

The ruling was strongly in favour of Debbie Purdy, 46, who has multiple sclerosis and who has been fighting to protect her husband, Omar Puente, should he accompany her to a clinic in Switzerland that specialises in euthanasia. She had argued that the law was unclear and uncertainty surrounding the issue breached her human rights.

Speaking outside the House of Lords after the judgment, Purdy, from Bradford, said she was "ecstatic".

"I am eagerly awaiting the DPP's policy publication so that we can make an informed decision to make sure what we do does not risk prosecution. I feel like I have my life back," she said. "I want to live my life to the full, but I don't want to suffer unnecessarily at the end of my life. This decision means that I can make an informed choice, with Omar, about whether he travels abroad with me to end my life because we will know exactly where we stand."

Moments after the decision was made public Keir Starmer, the DPP, said he had set up a team of lawyers to review the issue and promised to conduct a public consultation before setting out a fresh policy.

"This is a difficult and sensitive subject and a complex area of the law. However, I fully accept the judgment of the House of Lords," Starmer said. "The CPS has great sympathy for the personal circumstances of Ms Purdy and her family. We will endeavour to produce an interim policy as quickly as possible which outlines the principal factors for and against prosecution."

The decision, the last by the House of Lords before reconvening as the supreme court in October, was described as a far-reaching precedent by lawyers representing Purdy. Saimo Chahal, one of her legal team, said: "I always knew we would have to go to the House of Lords to get a judgment that was reasoned and considered. I hope that it will go a long way towards indicating that there are very many factors against prosecution in the public interest in cases involving assistance to a person who is mentally capable … and decides to have an assisted suicide in a country where it is legal."

Lord Lester QC, one of the peers who supported a recent bill that would have removed the threat of prosecution for relatives in assisted suicide cases, said: "It is up to the government to show leadership. People need to know whether their conduct is or is not going to be criminal, but there is a need for legislation."

At least 115 Britons have travelled abroad for an assisted suicide since 2002. Nearly 800 people from the UK have become members of Dignitas, the assisted suicide group based in Switzerland, since it was established in 1998. A report last month from campaign group Dignity in Dying, which has supported Purdy's case, said a further 34 Britons were in the final stages of preparing to follow.

In their ruling, the law lords recognised that Purdy was one of a growing number of people likely to want to travel abroad to die.

"The cases that have been referred to the DPP are few, but they will undoubtedly grow in number," said Lord Hope. "Decisions in this area of the law are, of course, highly sensitive to the facts of each case … But I would not regard these as reasons for excusing the DPP from the obligation to clarify what his position is."

Another of the law lords, Lady Hale added: "If we are serious about protecting autonomy we have to accept that autonomous individuals have different views about what makes their lives worth living. In additudinal surveys the British public have consistently supported assisted dying for people with a painful or unbearable incurable disease".

But the law lords were careful to avoid appearing to attempt to influence a change in the law. "It must be emphasised at the outset that it is no part of our function to change the law in order to decriminalise assisted suicide," Lord Hope said.

"No one who listened to the recent debate in the House of Lords … can be in any doubt as to the strength of feeling on either side or the difficulties that such a change in the law might give rise to".The Ministry of Justice said there was no need to change the law in the light of the Law Lords' ruling because the judgment related to the way the law was implemented by prosecutors, not the actual law itself.

The Ministry of Justice said there was no immediate need to change the law because the ruling related to the way prosecutors implemented it.

"The government believes that any change to the law in this area is an issue of individual conscience and a matter for parliament to decide, rather than government policy," it said.
Each time a young child is convicted of a serious crime, attention inevitably turns to the age of criminal responsibility and the sensitive question of how society determines when it should begin criminalising its young offenders.

Since 1963, the age of criminal responsibility in England has been 10 – an increase from the previous age of seven which, at the time, was the lowest in Europe. England's age remains on the low side. Switzerland, which holds children culpable at seven, and Scotland, which does at eight, are the only European countries with lower ages.

Calls to raise the age have intensified recently, since renewed controversy this year surrounding the killers of Jamie Bulger, and last week the conviction of boys aged 10 and 11 for attempted rape.

Many campaigners argue that children under the age of 12 cannot understand wrongdoing and should not face prosecution. In March, the children's commissioner for England, Maggie Atkinson, said that children below the age of 12 should not be treated as criminals.

Others call for the age of criminal responsibility to be 14 – the age in many other European countries.

So far the government has not indicated any willingness to change the age of criminal responsibility in England. "The government believes that children are old enough to differentiate between bad behaviour and serious wrong-doing at age 10," a Ministry of Justice spokesman said. "[This] allows frontline services to intervene early and robustly, preventing further offending and helping young people develop a sense of personal responsibility for their behaviour.

"In practice, the majority of young people are not prosecuted in court and there are rehabilitative processes in place, which include interventions to tackle offending behaviour and underlying problems."

Although that view is unlikely to satisfy children's groups, the question of age is one aspect of a broader set of demands for changes to the way the criminal justice system deals with children. Other issues include whether holding trials in open court with media and public spectators is an appropriate environment for young offenders; and the questioning of child witnesses in court.

Last week the Ministry of Justice said it would look again at whether the process could be made less intimidating for children.

"We will certainly be reviewing to what extent this has been successful as we continue to extend fair and accessible justice," a spokesman said.

That pledge comes as a report is expected this summer by the Independent Commission on Youth Crime, which will examine the impact of the court environment and questioning techniques.

It is expected to recommend more informal settings for trials involving children, in a move away from the adult courts.

The question of sentencing for young offenders is also likely to remain in the spotlight, although it is not yet clear whether the government will reform penalties for children who fall within the age of criminal responsibility. In March, the Youth Justice Board published data showing that 10- and 11-year olds were punished for more than 6,000 offences last year, more than 70% of which were non-violent.

Those figures have prompted children's campaigners to argue that the youngest children should be removed from the criminal justice system altogether, and dealt with through intensive supervision in a non-custodial environment, rather than through detention and punishment.
The high court's findings that Corby borough council was liable in negligence, public nuisance and a breach of statutory duty for its control of steel works during the 1980s and 90s is the most significant case of its kind since the thalidomide scandal of the 1960s.

The decision is the first to establish a link between atmospheric toxic waste and birth defects, something lawyers have previously struggled to prove because of the difficulty in showing material could be inhaled by pregnant women at a distance in sufficient quantities.

"This is the first time a civil court in this country – and quite possibly anywhere in the world – has connected birth defects and the negligent release of toxic waste in the atmosphere and put the two together," said Des Collins, who represented the 18 claimants.

"It required a huge chain to establish this potential causation. We had to demonstrate the toxic substances could be released in sufficiently small particles to travel sufficiently far, and then be inhaled by mothers at relevant times in pregnancy and cause these problems."

The thalidomide case, which was settled out of court after a group of children claimed their birth defects were caused by drugs taken by their mothers during pregnancy, also sought to establish a link between toxic substances and foetal development. But the courts have been reluctant to expand the list of possible causes of birth defects from the recognised culprits of alcohol, drugs, and genes.

"Before today's judgment it was an outside possibility that toxic substances in the atmosphere could add to this list," Collins said. "What we've done is bring that causation element from leftfield into the centre so that toxic waste is sitting in the list of possible causative links."

Mr Justice Akenhead, who presided over the case, said it was clear that the council had permitted waste to disperse into the atmosphere.

"Corby borough council permitted and led to the extensive dispersal of contaminated mud and dust over public areas of Corby and into and over private homes, with the result that the contaminants could realistically have caused the types of birth defects of which complaint has been made by the claimants (save in limited respects)," the judge said.

But whether the contaminants did in fact cause the defects in 16 of the claimants remains to be determined at a future hearing.

The judge said the implications of the case would take time to fully emerge. "The Corby reclamation was, however, in some senses at least, a 'one-off' reclamation involving a very large contaminated steelworks site which was very close to a town centre … There will be very few which are so large or so extensively contaminated."

Lawyers acting for the council argued the case would have implications for other reclamation sites.

"This is a significant concern because the standard of care has been drawn very highly, and could cause a rethink of the way that reclamation is carried out in the UK," said a spokesperson for Berrymans Lace Mawer, which represented the council.
